---
title: Toshiba NB550D Review
layout: post
tags : [tech]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

First off, briefly with the review. It looks very nice, but personally any laptop that isn't completely black (like my previous two) are nice. Battery life-wise, my own run of battery eater classic reached about 5 hours, so not bad. Speakers are superb for a netbook, and since I've never had any proper speakers with bass, the netbook speakers are arguably the best in my house. However, if you try to play music while typing on the keyboard, the sound goes all weird and echoey. Multitouch touchpad is quite fun, but the scrolling often overshoots. The keyboard has the right resistance, but some of the other keys (control, alt etc) are a tad too small. I'm not very used to typing on it, but that probably just because I'm used to the american keyboard.

No qualms about the screen, but I haven't taken it outside to be used yet. The ports are a bit stiff to start off with, but plugging things in gets easier (and looser) over time. The HDMI ports are full size, not mini-HDMI (as I had suspected after ordering it) For a netbook, the weight is a bit on the heavy side, but nothing too serious. The power button is awkwardly placed, so you can turn it on with the screen shut. However, you do need to hold it down for half a second or so, so that reduces the chances of turning it on accidentally. The touchpad buttons stick out a bit, so you can still click them with the screen shut. But they appear to be disabled when the screen is closed. The battery and the bottom is designed so there is a substantial gap between the table surface and the air inlet. However, the fan can get noisy when it occasionally maxes out.

After buying the netbook, the first thing I did was replace the 1GB with 4GB RAM. There's only one slot available, much like most netbooks. Although the specifications state that the maximum is 2GB, I read online that that limit is only imposed by Windows 7 Starter. After the RAM replacement and 'hacking' my Windows, it presented me with something like 2.4GB RAM usable. That was due to the 32 bit operating system, so I reinstalled Windows from scratch, using a 64-bit version. With the 64-bit Windows, the usably RAM was more reasonable at 3.6GB, with ~400MB reserved for the graphics. Note that since the recovery of Windows using the Toshiba recovery is dependent on booting the image from the 2nd partition, reinstalling Windows rewrites the MBR is effectively permanently cripples the recovery. I also noticed there was 400MB at the start of the HDD called 'System (Reserved)'. After deleting that to recoup some more space, Windows failed to boot, and I had to wipe and reinstall again. Windows, during installation automatically leaves some space at the start of the HDD as reserved, but 1) it's only 100MB, siginificantly better than the 400MB reserved by Toshiba dn 2) there are ways around it, just google '100MB reserved partition'. I took the latter option.

All the drivers and 'utilities' can be downloaded from the Toshiba website, but they claim that most of them are for 32-bit Windows only. However, they are all just extractors, and the installer are often 1) archibecture independent or 2) automatically installs the correct version depending your Windows. I spent days looking through the web and trying out the programs, and below are my results of what each program does, whether it's necessary, and any alternatives. Note that they are all tailerd for 64-bit Windows. For 32 bit, you'd be better off just copying the names of the programs you think you'll need and downloading them from the Toshiba support site.

- Toshiba Bluetooth Stack - the GUI for controlling the bluetooth driver. Not required if you want to use the Microsoft stack instead, but then you'll have to separately download the bluetooth monitor. I don't know anything about this in x64 since the Microsoft stack is perfectly adequate. This is preinstalled. Optional - see alternative.
- Toshiba Bluetooth Monitor - enables the Microsoft stack to automatically install. The same installation file is used for both x32 and x64. The default file listed on the support page is fine. If you use the toshiba stack, this doesn't need to be installed. Optional - see alternative.
- Toshiba Disc Creator - standard CD burner tool. I use cdburnerxp instead, but there are millions of better alternatives out there. I also don't quite get why this is prinstalled on a computer without a CD/DVD drive. Removed.
- Toshiba User's Manual - just a pdf file available to download on the support page. Bit of overkill to have a pdf file loaded as an installed application. Removed.
- Toshiba Supervisor Password Utility - sets passwords in BIOS. Not required if you 1) are prepared to reboot into BIOS when you change the setting or 2) don't need BIOS-level security. Removed.
- Toshiba Assist - arguably one of the most useless programs on the menu. Just displays shortcuts to Toshiba software based on category. Removed.
- Toshiba Webcam Driver - webcam software to set color setting and add avatars etc. Not a driver as the name suggests - windows can automatically install the necessary drivers. Removed for me, but otherwise optional.
- Toshiba Value Added Package (TVAP) - contains Utilites (accessibility software, removed), PC Diag (diagnostic software, not required for people who know their way around Windows, removed), Power Saver (drivers to enable more direct control over hardware power consumption, installed), Flash Cards (allows the keyboard hotkeys, installed), and common drivers that have to be installed for any of the aforementioned to work. The installer on the support page only works with x32, so I downloaded a x64 version. The download page states that it's a newer version (1.5.4.64) compared to the x32 installer, and that it's designed for other Satellite laptops, but it works perfectly. Installed alternative version.
- Toshiba Zooming Utility - this comes as a separate installer, but think also needs the TVAP. It enables the zooming hotkeys, Fn+1 and Fn+2, but I use the multitouch pinch-to-zoom instead anyway, so I removed it.
- Toshiba Photo Service - typical crapware. Removed.
- Toshiba Recovery Media Creator - basically copies the recovery image to your USB. Has to be at least 8GB big, and the software can't be redownloaded online. I removed it by accident, but then found the Windows 7 image creator to adequate anyway, so didn't need it. Removed.
- Toshiba Media Controller - media management for DNLA enabled appliances. I didn't have any, so didn't need it. Removed.
- Toshiba HW (hardware) Setup - changes settings that otherwise have to be changed in the BIOS. Removed.
- Toshiba Sleep Utility - changes BIOS settings related to USB charging while netbook powered off. Removed.
- Toshiba Service Station - updates Toshiba software. Removed.
- Toshiba Tempro - also updates Toshiba software, Removed.
- Toshiba Reeltime - software to change tasks/windows quickly. Useless for me, and just slows the computer down. Removed.
- Toshiba Registry Patch - registry patches that should fix errors. I didn't get any, so I didn't install any of them. Removed.
- Toshiba Network Device ID Setting Tool - more patches. Didn't get any errors, Removed.
- Toshiba Online Product Information - keeps track of new information online. Removed.
- Toshiba Wireless LAN Indicator - the description says it shows all available WLAN access points in the Windows logon screen. Sounded pretty useless, Removed.
- Toshiba Eco Utility - monitors power usage and adds an 'eco' plan to the power options. Better off just using the 'power saver' plan instead and running one less program. Removed.
- Wireless LAN Driver (Atheros WLAN Adapter) - drivers for wifi. The default download page gives different links for different architectures/Windows. The same file can be used for both x32 and x64. I didn't bother with the installer. To reduce the number of installed software, I opened the installer with 7z, then extracted the .cat, .sys and .inf files for x64, and installed them from the device manager. Makes the installer smaller and the 'Installed Programs' list smaller. Installed.
- Realtek LAN Driver - same as before, the default installer can be executed on its own or the x64 drivers extracted and installed separately. Installed.
- Realtek Card Reader Controller - ditto. Note that 1) it works without the driver, just not as well and 2) you need to plug an SD card in to get Windows to detect the unknown device first. Do a few restarts if 'Unknown Device' doesn't appear after plugging in and remove the SD Card.
- Realtek Sound Driver - just run the default installer for x32. It works, but remember to enable Dolby Advanced Audio in the control panel after installation. Installed.
- AMD/ATI HDMI Sound Driver - ditto.
- AMD Display Driver - ditto. Note that the version downloaded on the AMD site only includes the GUI controls, not the actual driver. The driver can also be updated automatically through Windows update, but without some of the more advanced components. Installed.
- AMD SATA AHCI Driver - dunno what this does, but it does change some of the wording in the device manager, and presumably makes it perform better (?). Installation method same as above, just use the default installer. Installed.
- Synaptics Touchpad Driver - enables touchpad multitouch. Extract and install the x32 package. Only the x64 folder is needed, and you can run the executable within that folder directly as well. Installed.
- Toshiba Flashcard Support - need to make the hotkeys work. Default package is fine. Installed.
- Toshiba HDD/SSD Alert Utility - detects if your HDD is about to fail. Not really required, and there are plenty of free and more informative alternatives out there. Removed.
- Toshiba ConfigFree - another useless GUI to manage network connections. Superfluous. Removed.
- Toshiba Bulletin Board - not a driver, and not really applicable on a non-touchscreen, already-slow netbook. Removed.
- Atheros Bluetooth Filter Driver Package - Run and install the x32 version. Works perfectly. Required regardless of which bluetooth stack you're using for x64. Not sure if needed for x32, not tested extensively. Installed.

Apart from the Value Added Package, which needs to be googled separately and a version for different laptop downloaded, the other packages 1) can be removed/not installed, 2) are available on the default download links on the support page or 3) can be installed on x64 systems using the x32 installer.