---
title: Friends
layout: post
tags : [reflections]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

I had a number of revelations over the past year, one of the most important being the value and development of friends. Increasingly, my definition of a friend is getting blurred. Each person has a place; there are some whom I’d happily spend hours with, just chatting and killing time, but at the same time, they’re my least-dependable friends, precisely because of the nature of that relationship. Then there are friends that generally wouldn’t spend that much time talking to, but if I ever get into a good conversation with them about mutually interesting topics, the insight they give I is fairly rewarding. For me, these also happened to be friends I would trust to be dependable and serious when the need arises. Then I get friends whom I share the most with when talking about work/interests, the first port of call for any work-related problems. If I were homeless, they wouldn’t exactly be the first port of call. But if I were jobless, then I’d probably start spamming their inboxes.

<!--more-->

Last year, I was, by definition, homeless. I started staying at a number of places. The first friend I stayed at, I’d say he was one of my better friends, one with whom I could have an extended conversation with, that I could say has a certain depth to his character. Right now though, I’m staying at the place of another friend. To be honest, even though I’ve known him since the end of the previous year, I know surprisingly little about him. Is it because we just don’t click? Or we don’t share the same interests to share our views about? Or does he lack that depth of character that I’m looking for? I have a coursemate, someone who I spend a lot of time with, chatting about everything from coursework to girls. When I want to just talk about stuff without fear of him bringing it up later or taking it too seriously, I talk to him. Of course, all this may change. We all grow up. Our personalities may meet in different dimensions at different times. As close as we are in one, we may not even coexist on another.

Everyone has secrets. For me, every secret corresponds to a certain subset of my friends. Nobody knows everything about me. Sometimes, I try to reveal myself to someone, but more often than not, it’s much more about me observing their response, how, or if they reciprocate, that is of significance. After a certain stretch of time, I gradually spill my past, times when I’ve been sad, or felt lost. It’s not such a big deal that other know about my weaknesses. But I usually care more about their thoughts on the matter. As much as I hope, not many people give meaningful responses, or indeed any acknowledgement. Is it because they simply don’t care? Or have they not yet reached a stage or felt the experience to know how it felt in my shoes? But those that do try to understand my predicament, my emotions, how I felt. These are the friends I value the most. They are the rarest, and at times of my greatest needs, something that can’t be solved by physical/financial means, they are there. It doesn't matter which dimension we share similar interests or traits, or what we normally talk about. They listen, they show they listen, and that makes them stand out.