---
title: Imagination
layout: post
tags : [reflections]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

A while back, I read an article highly recommended by a friend of mine, an opening speech at Roxbury Latin by a retiring English teacher. It was the most boring article I’d read in a long time, and one of the few where I still had to look up words and names of people to understand what the speaker was talking about. Some allusions, I still had no idea what it meant, or if they had any more subtle/deeper/symbolic meanings. At the same time, it was one of the most inspirational pieces I’d read in a long time. That one article was probably worth more to my personal development than all my PSE classes ever. (Admittedly, watching movies has probably been more useful than my PSE classes, but you get the point.)

<!--more-->

Since I was first introduced to English essays in primary schools, I’d wondered what their purpose actually was. Whilst I was naive enough to believe that maths at school was actually useful, I’d already dismissed English as a pointless subject. Now, the exact opposite is true. Unless I actively work in the relevant fields, when am I ever going to integrate variables in 3 dimensions? But this post is not about the ranting.

I spend a lot of my time on self reflection, most of which are based around why I have chosen this path. Why major in computer science? Why study at my university? Why did I commit myself to living in London? I look at others, doing practical, hands on subjects, with labs where they actually experiment in. Then I ask myself questions like, why does my course revolve around frustrating hours in front of an LCD panel, whilst others are measuring stuff, blowing up stuff, and more importantly, building tangible objects that they can show off to the world?

I recall the film (and books) The Golden Compass; I read the book series after watching the film. When I imagine fantasy story, a childhood memory of magical worlds, this is the universe that comes up (either this or Narnia). It also happens to be one of the last fantasy novels I read before I started moving to non-fiction a couple of years ago. Whilst the first movie set the scene (and my visual impression of the characters), it was the books that let my imagination loose. It was the books, experiencing the books, that allowed me to jump out of my reality and into the mind of the author.

When I was reading the books, wanted to place myself in the main character’s position, to live their lives. It not that my life was bad, rather, I felt their lives were fuller, more exciting, and much more meaningful. Indeed, this epitomizes the common idiom ‘the grass is greener on the other side’.

I see this as a craving for something impossible that manifests itself as an imaginary world in our minds. In small amounts, greed, cravings, and hope can be a highly motivating factor in our lives. Think of Star Trek, and how many of the world’s technologies have since set us on the path to converge on a end result like Star Trek. Mobile phones. Translators. Flat panel screens. Artificial intelligence. These have all been the result of our imagination, our thoughts of what we are, what we want to be, and what we ever could be.

English has never been about the language itself, about day-to-day communication. Yes, it’s enabled the communication between people, but that’s only a fortunate side effect. English, or indeed any language in general, is about communication between ages, communication of thoughts. What one person in the last century fantasized about, we have something to aim for. It’s about allowing individuals to explore what they cannot achieve, what they consider impossible. The point to stress is what one considers an impossibility, rather than what is impossible. It can be such trivial matters as a different career, such as Sherlock Holmes, or in Star Trek, travel to the stars.

Books were never written by the author for its readers. They were written by the author, to explore the limits of his own imagination. And the fact that readers pick up a book by a certain author is not the point – they pick up a book to explore this virtual world that the author’s created.

In this day and age, technology has allowed us to convey thoughts and the worlds that previously only existed in our imagination in visual forms. People have argued that movies are never as good as the book. I beg to differ. Movies are the same as a book, except the producers have already included their visual interpretation of their world. What the audience is missing compared to the book is the process of interpreting this world, our own imagination of what everything looks and feels like. It has become a much more passive activity. But the essence remains – it’s an exploration of the producers’ universe.

I often look at myself and reflect how dull my life is, how boring it has become. I want to explore different worlds, the things that I want to be, the person I could be, the worlds I could live in. If I had a passion for the English language, I’d write a book (in English). If I had a knack for 3D animations, I might create a short film to explore what I dream about. But many people lack this talent, to write lengthy books, or engage in any of the long arduous tasks of creating a masterpiece. Instead, we choose worlds that we find are closest to what we want to be or explore, and experience these universes instead.

So when people play video games, read books, or even just daydream, they are not ‘entertaining’ themselves, to so speak. Rather, they are simply giving themselves an opportunity to explore a universe which they themselves cannot live in in reality. To say that English is a waste of time, is like saying engineering is a waste of effort. Yes, building will come crashing down, sooner or later. Yes, software will become legacy and fall by the wayside. But we aren’t measuring just what we are creating.

In the same way that science builds on intellectual knowledge, the arts and languages build on universes that we’ve dreamt up. And these universes are even more important than the knowledge we’ve built. Science gets us to new heights. Imagination allows us to look up. Language allows us to see what everyone else has seen without looking, and live through all these possibilities in our mind.